It's very likely that at
some point you will need to
scale your model training
efforts beyond a single GPU.
I emphasized in the last video
that you'll need
to use multi GPU
compute strategies
when your model
becomes too big to
fit in a single GPU.
But even if your model does
fit onto a single GPU,
there are benefits to using
multiple GPUs to speed
up your training.
It'll find it useful to know
how to distribute compute
across GPUs even when you're
working with a small model.
Let's discuss how you can
carry out this scaling
across multiple GPUs
in an efficient way.
You'll begin by
considering the case
where your model is still
fits on a single GPU.
The first step in scaling
model training is to
distribute large data-sets
across multiple GPUs and
process these batches
of data in parallel.
A popular implementation of
this model replication
technique is
Pi torches distributed
data-parallel,
or DDP for short.
DDP copyists your
model onto each GPU
and sends batches of data to
each of the GPUs in parallel.
Each data-set is processed
in parallel and then
a synchronization step combines
the results of each GPU,
which in turn updates
the model on each GPU,
which is always
identical across chips.
This implementation allows
parallel computations
across all GPUs that
results in faster training.
Note that DDP requires that
your model weights and all of
the additional parameters,
gradients, and optimizer states
that are needed for training,
fit onto a single GPU.
If your model is
too big for this,
you should look into
another technique
called modal sharding.
A popular implementation of
modal sharding is Pi Torch
is fully sharded data parallel,
or FSDP for short.
FSDP is motivated by a paper
published by researchers at
Microsoft in 2019 that proposed
a technique called ZeRO.
ZeRO stands for zero
redundancy optimizer
and the goal of
ZeRO is to optimize
memory by distributing
or sharding
model states across GPUs
with ZeRO data overlap.
This allows you to scale
model training across
GPUs when your model
doesn't fit in the
memory of a single chip.
Let's take a quick
look at how ZeRO
works before coming
back to FSDP.
Earlier this week,
you looked at all of
the memory components
required for training LLMs,
the largest memory requirement
was for the optimizer states,
which take up twice as
much space as the weights,
followed by weights
themselves and the gradients.
Let's represent the
parameters as this blue box,
the gradients and yellow
and the optimizer
states in green.
One limitation off
the model replication
strategy that I showed
before is that you need to keep
a full model copy on each GPU,
which leads to redundant
memory consumption.
You are storing the same
numbers on every GPU.
ZeRO, on the other hand,
eliminates this redundancy by
distributing also referred to as
sharding the model parameters,
gradients, and optimizer states
across GPUs instead
of replicating them.
At the same time,
the communication overhead
for a sinking model states
stays close to that of the
previously discussed ADP.
ZeRO offers three
optimization stages.
ZeRO Stage 1,
shots only optimizer
states across GPUs,
this can reduce your
memory footprint
by up to a factor of four.
ZeRO Stage 2 also shots the
gradients across chips.
When applied together
with Stage 1,
this can reduce your
memory footprint
by up to eight times.
Finally, ZeRO Stage 3 shots
all components including
the model parameters
across GPUs.
When applied together
with Stages 1 and 2,
memory reduction is linear
with a number of GPUs.
For example, sharding across
64 GPUs could reduce your
memory by a factor of 64.
Let's apply this concept to
the visualization of GDP and
replace the LLM by
the memory representation
of model parameters,
gradients, and optimizer states.
When you use FSDP,
you distribute the data across
multiple GPUs as you
saw happening in GDP.
But with FSDP,
you also distributed or
shard the model
parameters, gradients,
and optimize the states
across the GPU nodes
using one of the strategies
specified in the ZeRO paper.
With this strategy,
you can now work with
models that are too big
to fit on a single chip.
In contrast to GDP,
where each GPU has all
of the model states
required for
processing each batch
of data available locally,
FSDP requires you to collect
this data from all of
the GPUs before the
forward and backward pass.
Each CPU requests data from
the other GPUs on-demand to
materialize the
sharded data into
uncharted data for the
duration of the operation.
After the operation, you release
the uncharted non-local data
back to the other GPUs as
original sharded data
You can also choose to
keep it for future operations
during backward
pass for example.
Note, this requires
more GPU RAM again,
this is a typical performance
versus memory
trade-off decision.
In the final step after
the backward pass,
FSDP is synchronizes
the gradients across
the GPUs in the same
way they were for DDP.
Model sharding S
described with FSDP
allows you to reduce your
overall GPU memory utilization.
Optionally, you can specify
that FSDP offloads part of
the training
computation to GPUs to
further reduce your GPU
memory utilization.
To manage the trade-off between
performance and
memory utilization,
you can configure the
level of sharding
using FSDP is charting factor.
A sharding factor of
one basically removes
the sharding and replicates
the full model similar to DDP.
If you set the
sharding factor to
the maximum number
of available GPUs,
you turn on full sharding.
This has the most
memory savings,
but increases the communication
volume between GPUs.
Any sharding factor in-between
enables hyper sharding.
Let's take a look at how
FSDP performs in comparison
to DDP measured in
teraflops per GPU.
These tests were performed
using a maximum of
512 NVIDIA V100 GPUs,
each with 80
gigabytes of memory.
Note, one teraflop
corresponds to
one trillion floating-point
operations per second.
The first figure shows
FSDP performance for
different size T5 models.
You can see the different
performance numbers for FSDP,
full sharding in blue,
hyper shard in orange and
full replication in green.
For reference, DDP
performance is shown in red.
For the first 25 models with
611 million parameters and
2.28 billion parameters,
the performance of FSDP
and DDP is similar.
Now, if you choose a model
size beyond 2.28 billion,
such as 25 with 11.3
billion parameters,
DDP runs into the
out-of-memory error.
FSDP on the other hand can
easily handle models
this size and
achieve much higher
teraflops when
lowering the model's
precision to 16-bit.
The second figure shows
7% decrease in per
GPU teraflops when
increasing the
number of GPUs from
8-512 for the 11
billion T5 model,
plotted here using a
batch size of 16 and
orange and a batch
size of eight in blue.
As the model grows
in size and is
distributed across
more and more GPUs,
the increase in
communication volume between
chips starts to impact
the performance,
slowing down the computation.
In summary, this shows
that you can use FSDP for
both small and large models and
seamlessly scale
your model training
across multiple GPUs.
I know this discussion has
been highly technical and I
want to emphasize that you don't
need to remember all
of the details here.
The most important thing
is to have a sense
of how the data model parameters
and training
computations are shared
across processes
when training LLMs.
Given the expense and
technical complexity of
training models across GPUs,
some researchers have
been exploring ways to
achieve better performance
with smaller models.
In the next video,
you'll learn more about
this research into
compute optimal models.
Let's move on and take a look.